ICA/Guidelines ICA2.md, before:

# Biomedical Imaging Analysis 4 ICA 2

For this ICA, you should produce an individual report highlighting the use for your software and reflecting on your group work.

The report should be max 4 pages long, including references and should contain:

- An **introduction** to the biomedical problem you worked on as a group, and how your software can help towards solving this problem.

    **Important**: you probably will not produce a "final solution" and might only produce something that contributes toward solving a tiny fraction of the problem. This is absolutely fine and you will **not** be down-marked for this. However, you should be able to critically reflect on your contribution.

- A **critical review of the literature** showing how the problem has been analysed

- A **reflection** on your group work, both as an
individual and as a group. What did you do well? What, and how, could have been improved?

- A critical reflection on **future directions** that could be taken to improve your software.

- Please use the `#ICA` Slack channel for any questions!

Commit message:

Added note about initial sentence

ICA/Guidelines ICA2.md, after:

# Biomedical Imaging Analysis 4 ICA 2

For this ICA, you should produce an individual report highlighting the use for your software and reflecting on your group work.

The report should be max 4 pages long, including references and should contain:

- A brief initial sentence, stating which group you were in for ICA 1 and what software you developed. For example: "_I was part of group 4, and we developed a software to classify X-ray images of the lungs into healthy and with pneumonia._"

- An **introduction** to the biomedical problem you worked on as a group, and how your software can help towards solving this problem.

    **Important**: you probably will not produce a "final solution" and might only produce something that contributes toward solving a tiny fraction of the problem. This is absolutely fine and you will **not** be down-marked for this. However, you should be able to critically reflect on your contribution.

- A **critical review of the literature** showing how the problem has been analysed

- A **reflection** on your group work, both as an
individual and as a group. What did you do well? What, and how, could have been improved?

- A critical reflection on **future directions** that could be taken to improve your software.

- Please use the `#ICA` Slack channel for any questions!
